README.md, before:

Copyright (C) 2018 Keith Thompson

### UPDATE, Sat 2018-06-02 :

I've added options to `gen-password` to require specified single
characters.  For example, if a site requires at least one decimal
digit and one punctuation character, you can use:

    gen-password -len 12 -lower -1decimal -1punctuation

Some sites restrict which punctuation characters can be used.
Use the `-1charset` option for that.

### UPDATE, Wed 2014-08-06 :

A very minor bug in `gen-password` caused a warning message:

    defined(@array) is deprecated at /home/kst/bin/gen-password line 151.
            (Maybe you should just omit the defined()?)

to appear when using recent versions of Perl.  (The warning appears
with Perl 5.16.3, but not with Perl 5.14.4.)  This bug had no effect
other than printing the warning message.  I've corrected it.

### UPDATE, Sat 2014-04-12 :

A bug was recently discovered in the `gen-passphrase` command.
This bug did not affect the security of the generated passphrases,
but it did cause the command to go into an infinite loop if the
provided dictionary is very long (specifically, if there are more
than 65536 candidate words to choose from).

An update I made a few days ago did not correctly fix this problem.
It avoided the infinite loop, but caused the program to ignore all
but the first 65536 eligible words.  In some cases this could create
a bias for words earlier in the alphabet.  This shouldn't have caused
a problem if you specify the initials of the random words (unless you
have a *huge* dictionary), but it could show up if you instead specify
the number of words.  It could also cause a generated passphrase to be
(slightly) less secure than implied by statistics reported with the
"-v" option.

The problem is now corrected, and `gen-passphrase` should in principle
handle up to 2<sup>32</sup> words (though it would probably run out
of memory before that).

My thanks to Jimmy Wales (yes, *that* [Jimmy
Wales](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Jimmy_wales)) for finding and
reporting the original bug, and for letting me know that somebody
out there is actually using this.

---

`random-passwords` is released under GPL version 2 or later.  See the
header comments in `gen-passphrase` and `gen-password` and the file
`COPYING`.

This is a small collection of utilities, written in Perl, for
generating random passwords and passphrases.

`gen-password` generates a random password of a specified length
(the default is 12 characters) from a specified character set.

`gen-passphrase` generates a random passphrase consisting of words from
a dictionary (`/usr/share/dict/words` by default), in the spirit of
[this XKCD cartoon](http://xkcd.com/936/).

Both utilities obtain random data from `/dev/urandom` by
default, but can be told to use `/dev/random`, which is much
slower. They will not work on systems that do not have these
device files. (I could have had it falling back to Perl's built-in
[rand()](http://perldoc.perl.org/functions/rand.html) function, but its
documentation explicitly says that it's not cryptographically secure.)

Note that the default `/dev/urandom` is almost
certainly random enough for most purposes. See [this
answer](http://superuser.com/a/359601/92954) I posted on
[superuser.com](http://superuser.com/) for more discussion.

---

# `gen-password`

`gen-password -help` shows the following message:

    usage: gen-password [options]
        -help         Display this message and exit
        -length N     Length of generated password, default is 12
        -charset ...  Character set, default is "a-z0-9"
                      The argument is a single word.
        -decimal      Equivalent to "-charset 0-9"
        -hexadecimal  Equivalent to "-charset 0-9a-f"
        -Hexadecimal  Equivalent to "-charset 0-9A-F"
        -octal        Equivalent to "-charset 0-7"
        -lower        Equivalent to "-charset a-z"
        -upper        Equivalent to "-charset A-Z"
        -alphanumeric Equivalent to "-charset A-Za-z0-9"
        -printable    Equivalent to "-charset !-~"
                      (ASCII non-blank printable characters)
        -1lower       Include (at least) 1 lower case letter
        -1upper       Include (at least) 1 upper case letter
        -1decimal     Include (at least) 1 decimal digit
        -1punctuation Include (at least) 1 punctuation character
        -1charset ... Include (at least) 1 character from the specified set
        -split N      Split with a blank every N characters
        -dev-random   Use /dev/random rather than /dev/urandom (slow)
        -debugging    Produce debugging output

The program assumes an ASCII character set. For example, it assumes that 
the set of lower case letters is `'a'` .. `'z'` 

---

# `gen-passphrase`

`gen-passphrase -help` shows the following message:

    Usage: gen-passphrase [options] initials   min-len max-len
           gen-passphrase [options] word-count min-len max-len
        -help             Show this message and exit
        -verbose          Show statistics about the strength of the passphrase
        -dictionary file  Use specified word list
                          Default is /usr/share/dict/words or $PASSPHRASE_DICT
        -dev-random       Use /dev/random rather than /dev/urandom (slow)
        -debugging        Produce debugging output
    Option names may be abbreviated; for example, "-verbose" may be given as "-v".
    The passphrase consists of a sequence of words randomly selected
    from the specified word list file.
    The first argument is either a string of lowercase letters
    (specifying the initial letters of the generated passphrase) or a
    decimal integer specifying the number of words.
    "min-len" and "max-len" are decimal integers determining the lengths
    of the chosen words

The passphrase consists of a sequence of words randomly selected
from the specified word list file.  The three command-line arguments
(following any options) are:

1. Either:

   * A string of ASCII lowercase letters, specifying the initials
   of the generated passphrase; or
   * A decimal integer specifying the number of words (each of which
   will be selected randomly from the entire word list);

2. The minimum length of each word; and

3. The maximum length of each word.

This was partly inspired by [this XKCD cartoon](http://xkcd.com/936/),
which suggests using long passphrases consisting of randomly selected
English words.  The example in the cartoon was "correct horse battery
staple" (of course you shouldn't use *that* specific passphrase).

With the first option, giving a string of lowercase letters as the
first argument, you can specify a known word that will remind you
of the passphrase; for example, "hello" might yield "hellion erosion
leprosy legless outlook".

Words are randomly selected from the word list file, usually
`/usr/share/dict/words`. Only lines consisting entirely of
lowercase letters are considered. You can specify a different
dictionary file by using the `-dictionary` option or by setting the
`$PASSPHRASE_DICT` environment variable. (For example, Cygwin has no
`/usr/share/dict/words`, so I set `$PASSPHRASE_DICT` to point to a copy
from my Ubuntu system).

With the `-verbose` option, `gen-passphrase` shows some statistics
about the estimated strength of the generated passphrase, based on the
number of possibilities for each word. The statistics shown will depend
on the size of the dictionary file being used. For example, on Solaris
9 `/usr/dict/words` has 20,068 qualifying entries; on Ubuntu 12.04
`/usr/share/dict/words` has 62,887, and on Centos 5.7 it has 355,543.

Here's an example of `gen-passphrase` with options that *could*
generate "correct horse battery staple", executed on Ubuntu 12.04:

    $ gen-passphrase -v chbs 5 7
    chasing hearsay bygones smocked
        1881 * 843 * 1586 * 2817
        7.0844e12 possibilities, equivalent to:
        42.69 random bits,
        9.08 random lowercase letters,
        7.17 random mixed-case alphanumerics,
        6.51 random printable ASCII characters

and on CentOS 5.7, with a much larger dictionary:

    $ gen-passphrase -v chbs 5 7
    cepous halpace bundist subfix
        7117 * 2895 * 5952 * 9233
        1.1322e15 possibilities, equivalent to:
        50.01 random bits
        10.64 random lowercase letters
        8.40 random mixed-case alphanumerics
        7.63 random printable ASCII characters

This indicates that the generated passphrase on Ubuntu is approximately
as secure as `vsxdrnhli` (9 random lowercase letters) or `0Z4sLMl` (7
random mixed-case alphanumeric characters). Using a larger dictionary
gives better results, but can result in a passphrase that's more
difficult to remember (*"cepous halpace bundist subfix"? Really?*).

Note that this shows the number of possibilities *given the criteria
you chose*. With the Ubuntu example above ("chasing hearsay bygones
smocked"), a hypothetical attacker has over 7 trillion possibilities to
consider *if* he or she knows that your passphrase consists of 4 words
starting with 'c', 'h', 'b', and 's', with 5 to 7 letters in each word.
Without that knowledge, the attacker's problem space is much larger.

---

If you find any bugs in these programs, *particularly* any security holes, please let me know.

-- Keith Thompson <[Keith.S.Thompson@gmail.com](mailto:Keith.S.Thompson@gmail.com)>

Commit message:

-1charset may be given multiple times

README.md, after:

Copyright (C) 2018 Keith Thompson

### UPDATE, Mon 2018-06-04 :

I've added options to `gen-password` to require specified single
characters.  For example, if a site requires at least one decimal
digit and one punctuation character, you can use:

    gen-password -len 12 -lower -1decimal -1punctuation

Some sites restrict which punctuation characters can be used.  Use the
`-1charset` option for that (which can be given multiple times).

### UPDATE, Wed 2014-08-06 :

A very minor bug in `gen-password` caused a warning message:

    defined(@array) is deprecated at /home/kst/bin/gen-password line 151.
            (Maybe you should just omit the defined()?)

to appear when using recent versions of Perl.  (The warning appears
with Perl 5.16.3, but not with Perl 5.14.4.)  This bug had no effect
other than printing the warning message.  I've corrected it.

### UPDATE, Sat 2014-04-12 :

A bug was recently discovered in the `gen-passphrase` command.
This bug did not affect the security of the generated passphrases,
but it did cause the command to go into an infinite loop if the
provided dictionary is very long (specifically, if there are more
than 65536 candidate words to choose from).

An update I made a few days ago did not correctly fix this problem.
It avoided the infinite loop, but caused the program to ignore all
but the first 65536 eligible words.  In some cases this could create
a bias for words earlier in the alphabet.  This shouldn't have caused
a problem if you specify the initials of the random words (unless you
have a *huge* dictionary), but it could show up if you instead specify
the number of words.  It could also cause a generated passphrase to be
(slightly) less secure than implied by statistics reported with the
"-v" option.

The problem is now corrected, and `gen-passphrase` should in principle
handle up to 2<sup>32</sup> words (though it would probably run out
of memory before that).

My thanks to Jimmy Wales (yes, *that* [Jimmy
Wales](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Jimmy_wales)) for finding and
reporting the original bug, and for letting me know that somebody
out there is actually using this.

---

`random-passwords` is released under GPL version 2 or later.  See the
header comments in `gen-passphrase` and `gen-password` and the file
`COPYING`.

This is a small collection of utilities, written in Perl, for
generating random passwords and passphrases.

`gen-password` generates a random password of a specified length
(the default is 12 characters) from a specified character set.

`gen-passphrase` generates a random passphrase consisting of words from
a dictionary (`/usr/share/dict/words` by default), in the spirit of
[this XKCD cartoon](http://xkcd.com/936/).

Both utilities obtain random data from `/dev/urandom` by
default, but can be told to use `/dev/random`, which is much
slower. They will not work on systems that do not have these
device files. (I could have had it falling back to Perl's built-in
[rand()](http://perldoc.perl.org/functions/rand.html) function, but its
documentation explicitly says that it's not cryptographically secure.)

Note that the default `/dev/urandom` is almost
certainly random enough for most purposes. See [this
answer](http://superuser.com/a/359601/92954) I posted on
[superuser.com](http://superuser.com/) for more discussion.

---

# `gen-password`

`gen-password -help` shows the following message:

    usage: gen-password [options]
        -help         Display this message and exit
        -length N     Length of generated password, default is 12
        -charset ...  Character set, default is "a-z0-9"
                      The argument is a single word.
        -decimal      Equivalent to "-charset 0-9"
        -hexadecimal  Equivalent to "-charset 0-9a-f"
        -Hexadecimal  Equivalent to "-charset 0-9A-F"
        -octal        Equivalent to "-charset 0-7"
        -lower        Equivalent to "-charset a-z"
        -upper        Equivalent to "-charset A-Z"
        -alphanumeric Equivalent to "-charset A-Za-z0-9"
        -printable    Equivalent to "-charset !-~"
                      (ASCII non-blank printable characters)
        -1lower       Include (at least) 1 lower case letter
        -1upper       Include (at least) 1 upper case letter
        -1decimal     Include (at least) 1 decimal digit
        -1punctuation Include (at least) 1 punctuation character
        -1charset ... Include (at least) 1 character from the specified set
                      This option may be given multiple times
                      (The other -1... options may only be given once)
        -split N      Split with a blank every N characters
        -dev-random   Use /dev/random rather than /dev/urandom (slow)
        -debugging    Produce debugging output

The program assumes an ASCII character set. For example, it assumes that 
the set of lower case letters is `'a'` .. `'z'` 

---

# `gen-passphrase`

`gen-passphrase -help` shows the following message:

    Usage: gen-passphrase [options] initials   min-len max-len
           gen-passphrase [options] word-count min-len max-len
        -help             Show this message and exit
        -verbose          Show statistics about the strength of the passphrase
        -dictionary file  Use specified word list
                          Default is /usr/share/dict/words or $PASSPHRASE_DICT
        -dev-random       Use /dev/random rather than /dev/urandom (slow)
        -debugging        Produce debugging output
    Option names may be abbreviated; for example, "-verbose" may be given as "-v".
    The passphrase consists of a sequence of words randomly selected
    from the specified word list file.
    The first argument is either a string of lowercase letters
    (specifying the initial letters of the generated passphrase) or a
    decimal integer specifying the number of words.
    "min-len" and "max-len" are decimal integers determining the lengths
    of the chosen words

The passphrase consists of a sequence of words randomly selected
from the specified word list file.  The three command-line arguments
(following any options) are:

1. Either:

   * A string of ASCII lowercase letters, specifying the initials
   of the generated passphrase; or
   * A decimal integer specifying the number of words (each of which
   will be selected randomly from the entire word list);

2. The minimum length of each word; and

3. The maximum length of each word.

This was partly inspired by [this XKCD cartoon](http://xkcd.com/936/),
which suggests using long passphrases consisting of randomly selected
English words.  The example in the cartoon was "correct horse battery
staple" (of course you shouldn't use *that* specific passphrase).

With the first option, giving a string of lowercase letters as the
first argument, you can specify a known word that will remind you
of the passphrase; for example, "hello" might yield "hellion erosion
leprosy legless outlook".

Words are randomly selected from the word list file, usually
`/usr/share/dict/words`. Only lines consisting entirely of
lowercase letters are considered. You can specify a different
dictionary file by using the `-dictionary` option or by setting the
`$PASSPHRASE_DICT` environment variable. (For example, Cygwin has no
`/usr/share/dict/words`, so I set `$PASSPHRASE_DICT` to point to a copy
from my Ubuntu system).

With the `-verbose` option, `gen-passphrase` shows some statistics
about the estimated strength of the generated passphrase, based on the
number of possibilities for each word. The statistics shown will depend
on the size of the dictionary file being used. For example, on Solaris
9 `/usr/dict/words` has 20,068 qualifying entries; on Ubuntu 12.04
`/usr/share/dict/words` has 62,887, and on Centos 5.7 it has 355,543.

Here's an example of `gen-passphrase` with options that *could*
generate "correct horse battery staple", executed on Ubuntu 12.04:

    $ gen-passphrase -v chbs 5 7
    chasing hearsay bygones smocked
        1881 * 843 * 1586 * 2817
        7.0844e12 possibilities, equivalent to:
        42.69 random bits,
        9.08 random lowercase letters,
        7.17 random mixed-case alphanumerics,
        6.51 random printable ASCII characters

and on CentOS 5.7, with a much larger dictionary:

    $ gen-passphrase -v chbs 5 7
    cepous halpace bundist subfix
        7117 * 2895 * 5952 * 9233
        1.1322e15 possibilities, equivalent to:
        50.01 random bits
        10.64 random lowercase letters
        8.40 random mixed-case alphanumerics
        7.63 random printable ASCII characters

This indicates that the generated passphrase on Ubuntu is approximately
as secure as `vsxdrnhli` (9 random lowercase letters) or `0Z4sLMl` (7
random mixed-case alphanumeric characters). Using a larger dictionary
gives better results, but can result in a passphrase that's more
difficult to remember (*"cepous halpace bundist subfix"? Really?*).

Note that this shows the number of possibilities *given the criteria
you chose*. With the Ubuntu example above ("chasing hearsay bygones
smocked"), a hypothetical attacker has over 7 trillion possibilities to
consider *if* he or she knows that your passphrase consists of 4 words
starting with 'c', 'h', 'b', and 's', with 5 to 7 letters in each word.
Without that knowledge, the attacker's problem space is much larger.

---

If you find any bugs in these programs, *particularly* any security holes, please let me know.

-- Keith Thompson <[Keith.S.Thompson@gmail.com](mailto:Keith.S.Thompson@gmail.com)>
